	PitsandTrapfalls	
Tomb or lair Traps
Pitfalls, stone drops, poison release and so forth.
•	Awa/Sav12 to notice a trap or dangerous terrain.
•	Searching an area, by default, automatically finds it.
•	Pro/Awa/Sav12 to avoid, leap, duck based on situation
•	Sav/Int12 to understand, describe & disarm
•	If fail, starts as 1DR damage & half that for grievous wound after an armor save.
•	If poison or disease, another Pro/Spi12 roll to resist or become afflicted. DRR by default. Or predetermined.
•	May transfer affliction or grievous wound to armor, as wear & tear. (poisoned/diseased armor is fouled)
 Pit and Trapfall
1.	Tunnel Descent
2.	Well or Pit
3.	Chasm
4.	Pit Trap
5.	Barred, locked door
6.	Collapsing floor or ceiling
7.	Small trigger trap, dart or crossbow
8.	Dead fall trap, trigger

Damage die roll should be same as DRR fail die.

	Damage	
1.	Vitality, exhaustion, frustration
2.	Vitality, exhaustion, frustration
3.	Wear & tear, specific to climbing
4.	Wear & tear, armor or clothes
5.	Wear & tear, random gear
6.	Half vitality, half painful wound
7.	Half vitality, half armor
8.	Grievous wound or affliction!


Tunnel Descent	
Test to descend. DRs to make it harder: distance, slick walls, very steep and so on. Roll total DR and add to 12.
Failures by DRR determine vitality drain, damage to gear, takes longer, a roll of Nat1 could be a dropped item or weapon, and/or penalty die for a short while.
If one should fail by more than 12 or 6DRs, the 6th could be a 1DR grievous wound on top of the first 5DR. Or fail by 16 or 8DRs could be 5DR (d12) vitality drain and a -3DR ankle sprain!
Vitality drain is the simplest, then wear & tear of some gear, then wounds, or affliction (if poison or festering element).

A Dungeon Well or Pit	
Murky water in the depths or a pit for prisoners moaning in horrible pain. Rats crawling about in either, littered with bones and filth.
It could be a summoning pit for dark shadows and evil spirits! Or a passageway leading straight down! This will have many purposes, hopefully all dark and foreboding.
Generally easy to climb down with traversing gear. It was made for a purpose. Whether that purpose or something far more sinister is happening must be decided.
1.	Festering water well
2.	Vermin infested well, sewage like
3.	Good clean mineral water, +1DR use in heal, cooking! Can carry d4 worth in any container.
4.	Dried and leads to tunnels below, fear factor, but a good way deeper!
5.	So deep as to be mysterious. Primordial wyrm beast hibernates far below! Having dug up from the underworld!
6.	Haunted, a demonic presence or ghost resides there! Used by local pagans in worship. Can be cleansed with holy battle and prayer!
 
A Dark Chasm	
In a shadowy passageway, just around a corner or barely visible alongside a path, a dangerous misstep and one falls who knows how far? So not obvious! Roll an Awa to spot it. Die Rank factors to increase the Awa12 to spot: around a corner, dark, a distracting feature above, being chased & so on.
Factors to help: cautious, light source. Immediate success: looking down for such things.
If one fails, they fall and must make a Pro save! It can be a random damage and DRR or predetermined.

Small Trigger Trap, Projectile	
didn’t write anything for this, i just discovered, making this for AI... huh!

Pit Traps	
Hidden under stone or forest floors, these traps are simple and common, but they are intentionally hidden! So it would require an Awa12 to spot and avoid. A Sav12 to disarm without triggering it. If aware and it is still triggered, only roll to avoid a Nat1!
The GM should roll have any in the front roll, stating a basic awarness roll for the area or for a better description or any deceptive means to get them to roll! If they actually search, it could be an instant spot &avoid and an easy disarm, depending on the sophistication intended.
Falling is a d6 + d6 or more for the spikes. Some may be poisoned garnering such based on a certain amount of damage inflected. They should be difficult to climb out of, especially if wounded or under attack.
So a difficulty of 12 to climb out normally!
But it’s probably treacherous terrain, so that would be an extra DR or their armor save! And if under attack, smooth walls or more, each could add a DR to the total DR roll to add to the 12 difficulty!
Dead Fall Trap	
Similar to pit traps, these however fall from the ceiling or roof. They might have added hidden bonuses since few look up or notice things above them. Have it make sense, a post, frame or support of some kind with gravity and weight bearing down all work to create a deadly dead fall!
A GM can determine the difficulty to spot and avoid, starting with 12 and adding DRs based on whatever factor deems plausible. Wide area, heavy rocks, well hidden could all add a DR, to then roll and add to the 12. If one triggers the deadfall, tripping a thin rope, standing on a plate or removing a treasured item, whatever it is, it

Tomb Door	
These barred or locked doors will have TR12 or more locks or bars on the other side. If barred, an armor save of d10 with 40 structural points. Axes have a armor piercing quality on wood, let’s say, of 5.
Perhaps a trap has also been placed?!

Collapsing Floor or Ceiling	
Whether old and decrepit or set as a trap, this floor or ceiling will collapse or has collapsed. One might notice if it’s a false floor or if it’s already collapsed. Use the same difficulty to avoid falling! A d6 to d12 fall damage and a bit extra for the rocks falling with thee!


Adding sophistication	
Any one of these could include added sophistication. One could add DRs to detection, the roll to avoid, to damage and more. These DRs should be determined ahead of time and rolled, making the trap more deadly. Tribes certainly sat around devising better defenses based on the terrain and structures available.
They should make sense to what is there, the setting and materials used.
 
	Altars,shrines,tombs	
Fires	
A simple fire at a campsite or a brazier with coals can be a sacrificial altar. Bones and burnt items could be found there. The type based on the family friendly setting of course! Animals being the most prevalent. Offerings to their gods. Dark shadows and fiery visions are to be had for rituals and summonings.
These are commonly placed in front of other altars, giving pageantry and illusion with flame and light. It would not be surprising if a witch will have flammable dusts or liquids to toss in, influencing followers and distracting missionaries.
Tomb	
burial, catacomb, cinerarium, crypt, grave, mausoleum, sepulcher, sepulture, vault
Pagans worship their ancestors and will have built and secured rich ones with traps and demonic curses. Treasures from these could easily fund a church plant and strengthen it.
Many Christian tombs are important, having relics and sacred items. These could be vandalized, taken over or destroyed, needing the Church to investigate.

More Esoteric Shrines	
Thematic and ornately done shrines are prevalent amongst the magicians and witches. They use these to impress upon their followers. While the rules do not overtly claim shrines to be essential, they can be. A shrine can be a source of magic points, DR bonuses and more, anything the GM sees fit as giving power and influence to the pagan leader.

Stones, megaliths	
Placed as spots along roads or in a henge circle, these are very common for pagans and can be stopping points or meeting places. Rituals and offerings are done here. Singular stones being wayside traveling spots while stonehenges are meeting circles where rituals are performed.

Crude Altar or Shrine	
A common altar will be made of wood, whether structural or a totem or a figure. These are used to place offerings in front of and can influence followers, giving them DR bonuses to denouement or any other based on the ritual.
These are essential and focus points for pagan power. Destroying them will affect the denouement of followers and the focus of the pagan witches and sorcerers.



Demonic scary altars	
For a final showdown in some epic campaign to rid the land of pagan worship and whoever led this from some secret place, one can create a demonic altar run by a pagan leader who definitely knows what they are getting into. Whether a sorcerer type or a witch, they will have significant demonic powers and their focus of extra
powers will come from this altar. It can be an evil entity, having some of its own abilities to hinder, frighten and/or curse the missionaries! Its destruction will be part of the dramatic conclusion!
 



The main catacombs of history tend to be Christian, however many have been lost to time, taken over & desecrated by pagans or rebuilt as pagan shrines and temples.
So there will be a mixture of pagan and Christian in the maze of spaces but the controlling factions will be pagan. Any Christian location will have been desecrated, hopefully leaving some clues of its past or warnings to help the missionaries.
The general goal of penetrating these underworld networks is to clear them out of all paganism, cleaning out the desecration and consecrating the holy sites once again. Many of the pagan ones may be so wretched that nothing but total destruction and sealing will do. It will require all altars and shrines to demonic powers be destroyed. The level of intensity, fun and mayhem could add demonic, monstrous forces. This style of Christian RPG is meant more for classic RPG style gaming and adds flavor to a game so that it isn’t always above ground evangelism and church planting. Obviously those are the main themes of the game, but it is definitely fun to have some dark dungeon delving diversions!
Catacombs are more expansive than we realize, miles of them run under Rome and many other major Dark Age cities. Most were constructed before the 7th century. They were ‘mysteriously’ sealed off until the 17th century or so, when they were rediscovered! A great story concept is to then wonder why the Church sealed off the catacombs. An obvious answer is that once Christianity was fully accepted, there was no need to hide or bury Christians under the cities. Cemeteries outside the cities could be legally utilized.
A fun way of looking at it, is that the catacombs beyond the Christian burial sites, became filled with evil pagan worshipers who went underground and defiled and desecrated the sites and dug further, opening up darker regions and summoning gates! This required Christian knights and clergy to go down and clear them out. They then had to seal them, hiding or imprisoning whatever evil lurked there!
So, for the Dark Ages dungeon delving, we shall generally go with the fantastical latter and not the former!

Deeper, Deeper Story
The proceeding tables are based on the DR system. So the +1DR refers to the die used getting upgraded. It starts at d4... to get to d12. The GM should prepare some of it ahead of time. The generic stats of worshipers, zealots, guards, thieves and leaders should be at hand. They are available in this book. The theme of each area can be unique. Once a major pagan group is thwarted, cleared out... This part of the catacomb is sealed off.
Most entrances will be below a church, in their crypt or tombs! Each church is assigned to protect the seal!

Use the following tables as guides, random generators or a pathway into the catacombs. The DR is a way of starting with a d4, then as you roll, +1DR will accrue to make it have a chance of getting more and more severe. The journey down should be long and arduous, and things like rations, torch kit and lantern and oil should be carefully logged.
To put it simply, each may get the LOW tag if there is a fumble or something on the chart marks it so. If it is already LOW, then it shall become expended! There will be ways to replenish these in the catacombs, plenty of pilgrims and pagans have left offerings or supplies in the dark, if they can be found!


Random Encounters. Roll the same die as the Parts roll, on a 4+ use the Random Encounters table.

Parts of a Catacomb, dr	
1.	Entrance, Entry Way, Stairway Out, Ladder Up
2.	Vestibule, small foyer or walkway
3.	Chambers for attendance, slaves, low salvage
4.	Stairway leading up or down +1DR
5.	Loculi are narrow corridors honeycombed with burials covered with slabs, low salvage
6.	Corridors, Passageways, Ambulacrum+1DR
7.	Ossuary of bones, salvage
8.	Stairway going deeper +1DR
9.	Hall, ornate glyphs, runes, paintings, statues, clues
10.	Crypt for mercantile family, high salvage, +1DR
11.	Arcosolium, arched recesses built in wall for a tomb
12.	Roll on the Deeper, Deeper Story!
 
Deeper, deeper story, d12
1.	Chamber for guards, warriors, eunuchs, armory, salvage
2.	Sepulchre of a saint, desecrated, high salvage
3.	Cubiculum of a Roman patrician, ‘bed chambers’, high salvage
4.	Mausoleum of a noble lord, rooms, several sarcophagi, high salvage
5.	Opening to cavernous realm, quarry, mine or waterway. D4: 1roll for beast, 2future industry, 3haunted curse, 4natural, sprawling darkness & treacherous terrain
BELOW RESULTS, KEEP ROLLING THIS TABLE.
6.	Chambers for high priests and their acolytes
7.	Shrine of a god
8.	Altar of offerings to ancestors
9.	Smaller temple, altar to a demi-god BELOW RESULT, MAJOR SETTING!
10.	Larger temple, shrine to a major god
11.	Basilica, domed ornate temple, multi gods
12.	An unholy demonic fantastical macabre place & event!


....THEDUNGEONCRAWLEXPERIENCE
Random Encounters, dr	
Use same DR as Parts of a Catacomb DR, for each area.
1.	D4, 1 Oil lamps lit on sconces, oil refuel! 2 Torches lit. 3 Morsel offering. 4 Vermin rats scurrying about.
2.	Slaves present, performing tasks, cleaning, gathering offerings. Roll conversion level for who they serve. Religiously loyal. Very resistant to leading them to Major Setting!
3.	Offerings are still present. Low salvage.
4.	Mourners and offerings here. Deep conversations! Minimal chance for violence. A conversion can garner Inspired Die based off DRR conversion.
5.	Worshipers or pilgrims. Random conversion level!
6.	Zealots, attendees for a cult are here for preparations. Very resistant! Roll two d8, pick lowest for conversion. Not violent unless attempt at conversion or notice of desecration of pagan shrines.
7.	Guards or followers of a cult, territorial and suspicious. Definitely resistant, two d8, pick lowest conversion, can be openly violent if bothered.
8.	Thieves are here. Conversion, two d8, pick lowest! Raiders, brigands, robbers, thieves, but rarely some may be good and on a mission to rescue or acquire something for family or the Church, depending on conversion level.
9.	Cult lair is partially here with a direct connection to any nearby pagan activity, +1DR to catacomb rolls.
10.	Some sort of prehistoric beast, akin to underworld darkness is skulking about. It is tired and very hungry.
11.	An evil spirit haunts the space as a dark shadow, creature or possessed. Use the table in the Possessed, Wretched, Demonic section! Use only once. Otherwise, a trap!!!
12.	Ritual in progress, high priests present, worshipers, guards. Start Major Setting!

NAT1 DR result!!!! Additional Features, DR
On any roll of a 1 in the DR results, use this table.
1.	Ornate frescoes, inscriptions, Int DRR garners info.
2.	The dead, exposed, vandalized, strewn or freshly buried! Roll minor resists for rot, frustration or disease!
3.	d4: 1Plague of insects, 2Vermin infestation, 3strange fungal growth, decide danger using 12+d12 for resist and then DRR affliction. Touch or spore contaminate? 4Larger cave critters on the prowl.
4.	Large beast or monster has found a new lair! Beast not here, but occasionally roll d4, on a 1, it returns.
5.	Crumbling, treacherous feature, ruins, collapsed area
6.	Trap installed against wayward vandals!
7.	Trap installed, more elaborate and dangerous!
8.	Blocked area, thick set wooden door. While locked can be picked or destroyed within an hour, depending on the DRR versus a 12. Will be loud and roll for random encounters each half hour.
9.	Next area is locked, requiring key, steel frame/door is Save d12+d4, Hull12, any armor save with 0 result damages gear by -1DR, except smithing tools. Mining stone around may be easier: Saved12, Hull14, but requires at least 4 parts to open up area. Very loud, very messy and every roll is about 20mins of work and any armor save that reduces to 0 damages gear by -1DR, except pickax. A key can be gained if salvage in any area nearby garners a special find. Since they are now looking for a key.
10.	Demonic presence, haunting, possession.
11.	Reroll d12 twice to have two. Add more if 11 rolled.
12.	Demonic form, corporate, summoned and terrorizing, having come at the fulfillment of doomed pagans!
 
	Major Setting	

When they stumble upon an area that the pagans have fortified as their own underground site, roll here for the build up of the opposition. Use the Hexen Crawl, to determine their major plot contrivances and why they are here.
Roll d12 on Deeper, Deeper Story, rolling a few times to get the major rooms in the area, utilized for worship. Assume mundane servant, clerical and security rooms along with storage supplies. All other results are extravagant, fortified and have salvage.
Roll d12 for guards, double that for slaves, triple that for zealots, followers.
Treat the slaves as mobs that will generally not resort to violence. Their conversion level is a base d8. They could go either way and are certainly more susceptible to conversion.
The zealots are more resistant and will resort to violence only if their leader or idols are threatened. Treat them as a mob, using simple mob attack.
Mob attack: Add 1DR per unit, upto 5. That is the attack and damage DR. Each vigor factor of 6 or 8 reduces that group by 1 DR if it takes that amount. Keep it that simple. They attack with daggers, stones, clubs.
Have an oppressor ready, a priestess, sorcerer, conjurer one prepared or use one listed here.











desecrate, sacrilegious, unholy, blasphemous, profane, godless, pervert, defile, befoul, violate, dishonor, disgrace
 
 Treasure, Relics, Artifacts... 
This is for main singular locations that will have loot, salvage, offerings, treasure! USE DRR method thusly:
Each missionary can roll to search the area, to garner what is there, using a trait they pick, describing why and how they use that trait. The GM can add bonus DRs to the roll if it is apropos, and/or based on the area or story. An area could have designated treasure based off location or story that will be there no matter the roll.
1.	pouch of denarri, d10 x d20
2.	sack of denarri, d20 x d20
3.	local stolen goods, 1 heavy or 2 medium
4.	local stolen resources, cart worth
5.	local merchant goods, cart worth
6.	local lordly item, medium, +4DR social
7.	local royal, heavy, +5DR social
8.	chest of coins, d6 x 100, 1 heavy
9.	ancient Roman item or weapon, a +1DR item
10.	ancient Pagan item, heavy
11.	Roman relic, medium
12.	Saintly relic, light
•	Ancient Roman weapons are superior. If the die roll has a dice pool, the GM could convert any additional die into die ranks and add to the bonus and style upgrades of the weapon. It should not go above a 3DR in one upgrade! Generally speaking!
•	Ancient Pagan items are only wanted by pagan forces, whether human or not! Story element! If shown to locals and destroyed, could help with conversion.
•	Roman Relics are items desired by local Lords, Royalty, and the Church whether for wealth or study. They can be exchanged for Writs, Permissions, Titles by local dukes and financial gain for the support of the Church.
•	Saintly Relics, if known or studied by the Church can be blessings for missionaries. They can offer a mild bonus, like 1DR to one aspect of the clergy or paladin. Perhaps it gives 1DR whenever Bless, Heal or Glory is used. Or it gives 1DR to the Spirit roll to resist fear. It should be specific in what it offers. To keep safe, they are a medium burden. They can be a bone, scroll, tome, ashes, letter, parts of scripture, wood from the Cross, humble ornament, and so forth. While true Christianity does not believe in ‘holy relics’ it is undeniably part of historical practices. They could be considered mementos that the saints hold onto for courage and support. Each missionary shouldn’t have more than one relic. If given to a local church it can be used as a holy relic that helps draw pagans for evangelism. It will also be considered a major church support and the missionaries gain a glory point. One can certainly forgo this aspect of the game, having relics which seem merely like magic items. If used, should be used lightly and the focus should be on the person’s own faith and perseverance.
Master Crafted Items	
These are examples of rare items made well, usually old Roman or Byzantine. Some may be available to purchase but only in exclusive circles. Most will be found as treasure. They are subject to wear & tear. Below are examples.
1. +DR to hit
2. +DR to damage
3. +DR to gear, equipment
4.	Lighter armor, 1 less burden, minimum is light, must still be fitted at a high price by an armorer in a city!
5.	Armor accessories, +DR to one’s armor save. Over 5DR becomes dice pool with keep highest. Can absorb more wear & tear.
6.	Well balanced, reduce armor treachery roll by DR.
7.	Well balanced lighter weapon with +DR to parry
8.	Great helm -1DR to grievous wound per encounter!

Saintly Relics	
1.	Cross of the Saints +1DR to faith points skill
2.	Holy Tabard of a Knight, Red Cross, +1 to Defense, +1DR to glory!
3.	Shard of the Cross +1DR to rebukes
4.	Holy Waters of Golgatha +d4 heal to Vitality, d12 uses
5.	Scarf of the Shroud +1 Spirit
6.	Scriptures on Parchment, +1DR to preaching & prayer
7.	Preachings of a Bishop, get one Blessing for 'free', must have Spi4 to read.
8.	Sanctify, consecrate and make holy, one weapon or item, +1DR holy to a weapon. A kit. Holy oil, prayers, a cross insignia. 1 use.
9.	Holy Artifact, gaining a one time DRR spirit roll for inspired die upon obtaining for each saint and adding 1 glory point when placed in a church. A well crafted cross, a saint's bones or ash, an old tapestry to have survived persecution, and so on.
10.	A small cross insignia, to add to any gear, giving an encouraging +1DR with that item!
11.	Old chest of lost church offerings. Given to a church, will give it financial aid and in turn give each missionary a plain Spi roll, the DRR giving them glory points equal to the roll!
12.	Writings of a Bishop-Warrior, successfully studying each section with an Int22 success, gives a holy warrior +1DR to hit skill, then +d6 to Vitality, then +1DR to armor, then +1DR to Intimidate. Each day of study, rested, near a pell & workout area, uninterrupted, -2 rations, will allow for 1 roll OR +1DR to the roll. Only 1 can read & study at a time. Minimum 4 prowess, 16 vitality to utilize. If in a mini-campaign, may read 1 section per rest period to accomplish.
 
 ...ICONOGRAPHY, RUNES, RELIQUARY 
	Salvage Offerings	
•	Roll a DRR, decide which table based on area, roll 2 of the DR, first is result, second roll is amount and/or freshness.
•	These tables are meant for longer campaigns in areas where there are varying levels of pagan offering sites.
•	This could be used for the catacombs filled with varying shrines, altars and temples.
•	It could be for cave and forest realms where sites litter the area due to pagan pilgrim activity.
•	Areas where bandits, cults, zealots have set up major pagan activities, all vying for the riches of an area.
Low Salvage, Offerings	
1.	Dead vermin or bird offering
2.	Offal and blood offering, farm animal
3.	Small farm animal offering
4.	Flower offerings
5.	Root vegetable offerings
6.	Leafy vegetable offerings
7.	Small trinket offerings, sculpts, figures, toy like
8.	Cheap trinkets
9.	Plus (rolls 9-12)... roll on Salvage table.
Salvage, DR	
1.	Roll on Low Salvage, even if told to roll here! Sad.
2.	Basic ration offering, may fill one’s own. Bread, sack of grain, potatoes, good as rations.
3.	Ration +1DR offering, may fill one’s own. Dried meats, sausage, cheeses, rich rations.
4.	Sack of salt.
5.	Pouch or bowl of spices.
6.	Mundane finding!
7.	Mundane finding and 1 inspired die!
8.	Mundane finding, the amount doubled!
9.	Plus (rolls 9-12), roll on High Salvage table.

High Salvage, DR	
1.	Roll on the main treasure table on the preceding page.
2.	Roll on the main treasure table on preceding page.
3.	Roll for a master crafted item!
4.	Roll on the main treasure table and add d4 inspired die for the missionaries to disperse.
5.	Roll for a master crafted item, that has Christian history and gives the one to use it, d4 glory points.
6.	Roll on the main treasure table and it is tied to a local church or mission, and gives an additional glory point to each missionary when returned to a church.
7.	Roll on the Saintly Relics.
8.	Plus (rolls 8-12), roll on the Saintly Relics and it gives the one to hold it dear, d4 glory points.

Freshness
1.	Horribly rotten, prime festering, flies, larva, resist temporary revulsion with Pro/Spi or be at -1DR in area
2.	Rotting, festering, gnats, yuck
3.	So old as to be a dried disturbing husk
4.	Stale, not edible for humans
5.	Stale, edible, could cook
6.	Fresh, recent offering, though bloody or soiled
7.	Plus, fresh, recent offering, well displayed if creepy

Mundane Findings of Usefulness	
Use the DRR as DRs worth for using as bonus die and roll it for what is found:
1.	Local loot, trinkets, oddities found, can be used for the local church, for trade, for persuasion of locals only. Could be from offerings or stolen and could be used to return to locals.
2.	Local information garnered, from signs, scrolls, parchments, trinkets, insignias on tattered cloth, pagan sculptures, rune markings and so forth
3.	Twine n nails to repair gear
4.	Traversing gear specific to the area, perhaps already set in place or made of local, degradable materials, may be used as a bonus for this area only
5.	Local resources for trade, useful to locals in their daily usage, a clay, inks from something, poor quality ore, weaving, building materials and so forth.
6.	Camp and bedding comforts, too cumbersome to take, like sheets, drapes, bedding, candles, bedpan, cushions and so forth, may be used without much travel
7.	Rations, giving a bonus to eat, trade, use
8.	Rivets n nails to repair armor
9.	Unique oil to sharpen a blade! Each confers DR to hit OR to damage!
10.	Strong sap or resin for a torch, each DR adds to light for a short while for search and Awa rolls.
11.	Healing ointment or for disease resistance
12.	Pagan trinkets or idols, to use, dispose of properly, used for evangelism purposes, for preaching or rebuking
 
 What’s a DRR again??? 


A DRR is the number above the difficulty to search, usually a 12, that is then halved. This is the DR which is converted to the die that one rolls for a result. If it is a dice pool, use the secondary dice to add more to the amount.
We also use DRs as consumables. So 5DR of gear repair, can be used, like inspired die, to aid in gear repair.
So if using Mundane Findings of Usefulness table a missionary rolls a 22 of a default 12, thusly a DRR of 10, halved is 5 which is 5DRs... roll d12 on the table, and also get 5DRs worth of whatever is rolled.
 
  the one shot or minishot 
This section highlights a way to create a one shot or short gaming experience for an evening of play or over a few sessions. The players characters will gain glory points and spend them as they go along. It is intended for quick adventures, pre-made characters and quick upgrades to a fun finale against a big boss or event.
Searching through a catacomb for a main event is a good way to use this one shot method. It is advisable to have the tomb and map prepared ahead of time and the encounters kept as the first small intro encounter, a tougher encounter, that then leads to the main event. In between can be some exploration and salvage amongst various rooms. All of these are done to try and upgrade the missionaries combat and blessings for the finale.
There can also be one or two evangelism encounters with pagans who are in the catacombs or dark forest visiting ancestral burial sites or as pilgrims heading to a temple. If converted, this will act as a salvage reward.
Some pre-made characters are provided in the following pages as archetypes to start. They could be given a first time d12 roll for extra glory points to start!

Glory Points Gained	
In addiction to salvage glory points, each member of a missionary group will gain glory points each for the following.
•	Defeating foes.
•	Converting any foes not killed, as a group.
•	Converting any pilgrims or pagans that are separate encounters.
The GM will decide a DR for a glory point roll, based on the challenge, how well they roleplayed, and/or how high the die rolls were. Use the Denouement class listing in the Combat Section as a way to decide.

Treasure Hunting	
When searching about for salvage, each missionary gets to roll, picking their trait and any skill that is apropos. It isn’t just about ‘treasure hunting’. There is discernment in what is to be found and why. Missionaries are looking to cleanse and purify the area and any treasure gained will be to the support of the cause.
So the table of salvage represents searching each area and clearing it of pagan desecrations, gathering up anything valuable for the Church finances & charity and giving each missionary a sense of holy accomplishment.
All of this is to build up the missionaries for a finale with the central pagan boss or gathering, to purge this area of a pagan stronghold!
Main Table of Quick Gains	
1. +1 inspired die, cleared out pagan trinkets
2. d4 inspired die, cleared out a pagan ritual space, symbols, sculptures
3. 1 glory point, pagan idol found, destroyed
4. 1 glory point, 1 inspired die, idol & space cleared out
5. 2 glory points, Christian momentos found, cleared of pagan defilement
6.1	glory point, d6 DR worth of healing supplies
7.1	glory points, d6 DR worth of armor repair supplies
8.	3 glory points, recovered a saintly memento, writing, artifact
9.	4 glory points, recovered a known Church artifact, cross, emblem, banner, relic
10.	Master crafted weapon or gear +3DR, split anyway, replaces what one has AND one major factor is improved d6: 1-One Less Burden, 2-Crushing is 18(minimum), 3-item +1, 4-less 1 on Lethal, 5-less 1 on Bleed, 6-something the player senses!
11.	Saintly relic, add 1DR* HOLY to any weapon as holy damage, or if item, adds to Faith Point bonus as separate HOLY die or can add to preaching or praying as separate HOLY die.
12.	Roll on Saintly Relics table, in the Treasure section.
Any secondary die, use below!
If their salvage roll is high enough to garner 6DR or more, use the additional die below.

Trait used for the roll	
These are rolled here, based on the trait used.
•	Pro: Roll die for number of DRs in healing supplies.
•	Awa: Roll die for number of rations, torch kits or oil.
•	Sav: Roll die for number of DRs in armor or gear repair.
•	Spi: Roll die for Inspired Die.
•	Int: Roll die for number of answers to nature or historical questions about area.
•	Soc: Roll die for number answers about the cults, factions, paganism in area, which can aid in persuasion or calm preaching.
 
 DarkEvilGrimEncounterTable 
This is all the creature listings in their generalized groupings.
1.	Vermin, swarm
2.	Natural animal, creepy
3.	Natural beast, feral
4.	Ruffians, brigands, bandits
5.	Cultist warriors, beastmen, barbarians
6.	Elite cult zealots, major figure
7.	Minor dragon beast
8.	Major dragon beast
9.	Kraken, coastal beast
10.	Primordial beast
11.	Demonic possessed, feral, rabid beast
12.	Cults, organized, deceptive, cultured
13.	Witches
14.	Elite organized, powerful cults, skilled
15.	Warlock, Sorcerer, Magician
16.	Cursed mysterious encounter
17.	Ogre, Troll
18.	Giant
19.	Fantastical, Primordial Beast!
20.	Demons!!!!
These tables are another guide for creating one’s own setting or for encounters, utilizing a DR type upgrade as in the Catacomb and Dungeon Crawl Experience sections at the end of this book. Start with 1DR as a d4, then upgrade and go up to d12.
Also, this can be used for missionaries wanting to have a more random, traveling adventure, looking for souls to save in more ways than one.
The intention of the Dark Ages setting is more established lands and settlements that the missionaries go to, but one could derive a ‘random’ hex crawl type situation, in the vast Germanic Black Forest or the Tuetoburg Forest or along the countryside of any area.
Missionaries could seek souls in these areas and start something of a hex campaign. The main souls to save would be the actual pagan cults one finds in the random tables!
The conversion level of these would generally be {d8,d8}keep the lowest!

	Main Table	

Basic encounters for random settings, generally in wilderness or away from settlements.
1.	Vermin, swarm
2.	Natural animal, creepy
3.	Natural beast, feral
4.	Ruffians, brigands, bandits
5.	Cultist warriors, beastmen, barbarians
6.	Elite cult zealots, major figure
7.	Minor dragon beast
8.	Major dragon beast
9.	Kraken, coastal beast, giant crabs
10.	Primordial beast
11.	Demonic possessed, feral, rabid beast
12.	Use The Plot Thickens Table
 
	Plot Thickens	
These are tied to more fears and trepidations locals will have over an area or pagan activity.

1.	Use Main table, but double amount in area, or if a major beast, add younger or hungry hostile scavengers
2.	Cults, organized, deceptive, cultured, with minor witch, sorcerer
3.	Witches
4.	Elite organized, powerful cults, skilled
5.	Warlock, Sorcerer, Magician
6.	Cursed mysterious encounter
7.	Ogre, Troll
8.	Giant
9.	Cults, organized, deceptive, cultured, with a coven or very established sorcerer
10.	Fantastical Primordial Beast!
11.	Demons!!!!
12.	Reroll here twice, adding both! If this rolled again, add a third and so forth.


easy modular map pieces
Notable signs to follow, the old dead tree, the fallen tree. Could be fallen to block the road!
Roll axe or chop wood skill wouldn’t be success or fail as much as how long and any fail against a 12 would be the difference halved. That would be the DR damage to their weapon OR vitality drain from tiring and it would take awhile.



Going through the forest would have treacherous terrain tests, where failure is the draining of vitality, wear & tear of gear, and/or delay in time!




A crude totem or shrine, decked with thematic accessories, usually in the vein of bones, dead animals, trinkets and the like. It will be considered sacred and definitely add to their morale, resist and denouement. It could be known that they are not always at the shrine. Or, as a finale, this is where they do their dastardly deeds and must be confronted in an epic battle!
The totem should give the witch bonus faith points, a focus of certain rituals, a bonus to casting her magic and more.




Strategic terrain! Could hide ambushers, home of wild boars, part of obstacles along path or as treacherous terrain tests!
 
	knight	
Prowess +3
Awareness +1
Savvy 0
Spirit +2
Intellect -1
Social -2


Defense: 15(17*if shield), Armor Save d6 Vitality:
6 + Prowess +d6
Gear & Armor
Chainmail medx2, great helm heavy, weapon, shield*, tasty sausage
Combat
Greatsword Pro+3+1DR, d10 dmg, 2H, crushing, parry+1, bleed6 or
Sword Pro+3+1DR, d6 dmg, parry+2, bleed6
Faith Points, Spi+2+1DR
 

•	Glory Adds damage die.
 
Blessings: Each encounter, may spend 1=d4, 2=d6, 3=d8, 4=d10, 5=d12
 
•	Holy Weapon Duration only, cancels unholy armor from unholy targets.
Skills & Upgrades: Intimidate Pro+3, 1DR Armor Upgrade
To Hit upgrade Damage upgrade Vitality
Guard
Repair Steel armor, helm Repair blades
 
	clergy	
Prowess 0
Awareness -1
Savvy -2
Spirit +3
Intellect +1
Social +2

Defense: 11, Armor Save d2 Vitality:
4 + Prowess +d6
Gear & Armor
Leather armor, weapon, lantern & oils, butcher leather tools, Prayer Book+1DR
Combat
Mace Pro+0, d8 dmg, crushing, parry or
Warhammer Pro+0, d12 dmg, 2H, crushing, slow
Faith Points, Spi+3+2DR
Blessings: Each encounter, may spend 1=d4, 2=d6, 3=d8, 4=d10, 5=d12
1.	Bless Bonus die to hit or skill rolls.
2.	Heal Heal vitality based on die rolled.
3.	Protection Adds die to defense, optional deluge & duration. MORE, GP cost on how many you will have
4.	Rebuke Drains vigor, no save for minions.
5.	Exorcism Drains vigor for unholy! Powerful could resist!
6.	Holy Mace Faith point for duration, then for both to hit & holy damage!
Skills & Upgrades: Preach Spi+3, 1DR Prayer Spi+3, 1DR Faith Points Leather repair
Butchering, field dressing
 
	Mercenary, soldier	
Prowess +3
Awareness +2
Savvy +1
Spirit -2
Intellect -1
Social 0


Defense: 15(17*if shield), Armor Save d8 Vitality:
6 + Prowess + {d6,d6}kh
Gear & Armor
Brigandine heavy, helm light, weapon, shield*, rations, sharpening stone
Combat(pick 1 at 1DR)
Spear Pro+3+1DR, d6/d8 dmg, reach, 1-2h, parry 2h only, Bleed6 Sword Pro+3+1DR, d6, parry+2, bleed6
Axe Pro+3+1DR, d8, pull, bleed8

Skills & Upgrades:
Intimidate Pro+3+1DR Armor Upgrade
To Hit upgrade Damage upgrade Vitality
Parry+3(+2 from sword), roll DRR vs strike. Takes a maneuver.
Sword Sharpening Sav+1+1DR (give DRR for to hit, must use 1DR immediately for each attempt, until used up)
Guard duty Spot miscreants!
 
	Rogue, Scout, guide	

Prowess 0
Awareness +3
Savvy +2
Spirit -1
Intellect -2
Social +1


Defense: 15, Armor Save d2 Vitality:
4 + Prowess +d6
Gear & Armor
Leather armor, weapon, torch kit, butcher leather tools, quiver
Combat
Bow Awa+3+1DR, d6, 2H, Lethal6 Dagger Pro+0+1DR, d4, Lethal4, Bleed4 Dagger Awa+3 (if surprise attack)
Skills & Upgrades:
Guard, Keep Watch Awa+3+1DR Hunt (find game) Awa+3
Sneak Awa+3+1DR
Scout Area for Human activity Awa+3 Track Awa+3
Trade Soc+1 Damage upgrade! Dodge Awa+3 Seek Cover, Awa+3
Leather Reapir Sav+2 Camping Awa+3
 
	patron lady	
Prowess -2
Awareness +1
Savvy -1
Spirit 0
Intellect +2
Social +3

Defense: 13, Armor Save - Vitality:
4 + Prowess +d4
Gear & Armor
All gear that makes sense for a patron lady, in her cart. And some luxuriant items that could give bonuses to society rolls.
Perfume +1DR, Spices +1DR, Fancy Cheese +1DR, Good wine +1DR, Fancy dress
+1DR, Coins for basic trade +1DR
Combat LightcrossbowAwa+1+1DR,d6dmg,Lethal4,Reload or
Dagger Awa+1, d4 dmg, Lethal4, Bleed4
Skills & Upgrades & Woman’s Touch
Persuasion Soc+3+1DR Trade Soc+3+1DR
Details & Comeliness Soc+3+1DR,+d4 Distraction (subtle) Soc+3+1DR,+d4 Feigning (overt) Soc+3+1DR, +d4 Crossbow to hit+1DR
Crossbow damage +1DR
 
	Nun	
Prowess -2
Awareness +2
Savvy 0
Spirit +3
Intellect +1
Social -1

Defense: 13(14pan), Armor Save - Vitality:
4 + Prowess +d4
Gear & Armor
Cooking gear(pan), Rations for a week(group), blanket, dagger, sewing kit, lantern & oil
Combat
Pan Pro-2, d4 dmg, Parry/shield+1, blunt Dagger Pro-2, d4 dmg, Lethal4, Bleed4
Faith Points, Spi+3+2DR
Blessings: Each encounter, may spend 1=d4, 2=d6, 3=d8, 4=d10, 5=d12
1.	I See An Angel (epic, limited use!)
2.	Miracle of Healing Acts like askill, roll DRR, toreduce wounds. May add other factors to roll, versus 12 + wound DR roll. In combat less factors than when preparing & resting.
3.	Repel Minions will flee/avoid nun for duration. MORE, GP cost on how many Blessings
4.	Hope Gives anyone bonus die for next roll. Can be anything! Including non-d20 rolls.
5.	Heal Heal vitality based on die rolled.
Skills & Upgrades & Woman’s Touch
Faith Points 2DR Cleaning Awa+2,1DR,+d4 Mothering Int+1,1DR,+d4 Pans & More, Spi+3
